Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Richard Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Sarah Steinlo Brenner. She's
a writer, content strategist and researcher. She is head
of research for the Future Narratives Lab, where their
work. Focuses on narratives about social and political change,
and today we're going to talk about her book
Don't Talk About Politics, How to Change 21st Century
Minds. So Dr. Loren, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me.
OK, so let me start by, let me start
with a basic question here. So what motivated you
to write this book? I mean, was, does it,
did it have anything to do with the timing
with the current political context we're living in, or
was for some other, was it for some other
reason?
Yeah, I mean, look, I'm a person who in
2016, uh I was working for a place called
the School of Life, which is a very popular
YouTube channel, basically, with a lot of other attached
parts of it. And that was a great thing
to be doing in many ways, but, um, obviously,
in 2016, Trump won the election in the United
States and also Brexit happened here in the United
Kingdom where it was voted in. Here in the
United Kingdom, and I was living in the United
Kingdom as an American, so there was kind of
a moment in my life where I thought, this
is not enough. I need to be doing something.
In response to this moment, and I know that
the crises that caused things to happen in 2016
are much deeper, and they extend much further back
in history, and that's just when I, like a
privileged white lady, noticed them, but, um, that's a
lot of the impetus, and that is the year
that I decided to apply to PhD programs, and
I went and got a PhD in a combination
of cognitive science and critical theory, which is not
a common combination, and um. And that's part of
the motivation. And then I think another part of
the motivation, and this is probably the secret fetish
object of every writer at some level, is to
understand a little bit about the contradictions in the
way I was living. So the kind of way
I had grown up in DC thinking about it
implicitly because of everyone around me thinking about it
this way as a sort of successful liberal democracy,
right? That's how we saw, that's how you were
taught to see it growing up and um. People
were very attached to a lot of the ideas
that I take on early on in the book.
They're very attached to the idea of the marketplace
of ideas, and to debate and, and those things
as forms of political reasoning that basically they felt
if those were happening, and then you had a
democracy and you would be OK. Yeah, yeah, that,
that those, that, that those two things, debate and
the and the marketplace of ideas were certainly not
enough, and maybe not even working at all. Um,
AND I kind of wanted to understand my own
disillusionment, or rather to see outside of it and
understand what had really happened and what had always
been happening. So that's, that's the beginning of it
anyway, yeah.
Yeah, because we have this very common idea and
we can talk about where it comes from later
on, but that arguing and debating political ideas in
general can change people's minds. But I mean, does
it, does it really work and particularly nowadays with,
I mean, here in Portugal it also happens when
we have elections like presidential elections, legislative elections. And
so on, we're always flooded with debates on TV
and so on between the different parties, the different
candidates, and we tend to put some value on
that and think that, oh yeah, if people just
listen to them, they will be able to figure
out which one has the better ideas and vote
for them. But I mean, does that really work?
No, amazingly, there's some pretty good data analysis about
televised debates in particular. Um, AND it was done
at Princeton University. They kind of went and took
all of the available data on all of the
publicly, or like, well, as many as they could
at that time of, of the publicly debated either,
you know, referendums or elections, and they looked at
whether public opinion changed in a noticeable way in
either direction the day after a debate. Because that
would suggest, right, that if you're, if, if people
change their mind more the day after a debate
or between those two days, then that has some
effect. Maybe it's not even rational, just end effect.
And amazingly, the answer is that there's no, there's
no noticeable effect when you see that like move
up and down in the polls the day after,
it's actually about the same movement that would happen
on any given day. It's, it's a random statistical
walk essentially, you know, about the people they happen
to ring up on the phone that morning. And
that is a very good piece of evidence that
debates do not change people's minds. The watching debates
certainly does not change people's minds, and that there's
pretty good evidence to suggest that engaging in debating
also does not change people's minds for the most
part, because, first of all, by the time you're
debating, you probably have an opinion. And secondly, that
opinion is tied to other very significant factors in
your life that are much more predictable of what
you're going to believe politically and that are much
more formative of what you believe politically. And the
two that I conquer in my book, so to
speak, well, no, that I cover in my book,
are your own actions and experiences, your own life,
which shapes your political intuitions, and also your social,
your social ties. And so over the course of
people's lives, if anything changes their views, it's probably
going to be one of those two things or
often a combination of those two, but none of
that has to do with debates. Um, I, I
sometimes compare debate to like drawing in the sand
on the beach, because it might be that for
a minute, you know, people say, well, he kind
of took this point to heart or whatever. Yes,
but then the waves come within, you know, 12
hours, and pretty much the same for our political
views that the other big factors in our life,
the giant ocean washes the little details of the
conversation away.
Yeah, and I mean, correct me if I'm wrong,
but I really think this is what I've been
noticing over the years is that even political commentators
when they comment on the debates after they're done
and people online, it seems that they just watch
the debates. It's a sort of a football match.
It is to see if their side wins, which
side won, to score points and stuff like that.
It's not really with the intention of with a
sort of open mind, listening to people and seeing
and trying to figure out which one. As the
better ideas, right?
Yeah, so I would often say, you know, it's
like gladiatorial combat for the modern age, and then
in Roman times people loved watching gladiators. They didn't
think this is making our political system valid. They
just said like this is fun, right? And now
we have sports, and Freud says that you have
sports because it prevents people from going to war,
right? Like it's a funnel for their aggression, and,
and I think that debates are the same, and,
and, and if we think about them that way,
it's basically a sport for politically minded people. Great,
you know, have fun. But, but what's silly is
that we also elevate it to the status of
something that's actually part of democracy itself, and there
is no really good reason to think that that's
true. Um, IT is a sport, it's something that
requires skill that some people are better than others,
it's kind of fun to watch, uh, that's very
fun to watch drunk, OK, but that doesn't make
it, you know, uh, the cornerstone of democracy, and
in fact, it's not, it's not very indicative of
democracy either way. It cannot furnish a democracy on
its own or even do very much for it.
And where does this very liberal and by liberal
here, I don't mean left wing but really liberal
more broadly, this very liberal idea of the marketplace
of ideas come from exactly because we've been fed
for a long time now this idea that Oh
yeah, if you just allow for people to uh
debate in the public square to exchange ideas, then
just inevitably the best ideas will come up on
top and people will just accept them as the
best ideas. I mean, where does that come from?
I mean, I think there's there's, I can give
you a historical answer, right? And then I can
give you a materialist answer, and they're both right.
So the historical answer is that this term is
usually um attributed to a bunch of Supreme Court
decisions about free speech, where they were first um
considering whether it was acceptable to essentially censor a
bunch of Jewish radical communists, I think, and then
whether it was acceptable to censor the KKK. Uh,
TWO very different groups, uh, but in any case,
in those decisions, the Supreme Court justices use this
term, the marketplace of ideas, and the question is
like whether the state should intervene in the marketplace
of ideas. But I think that that's like a
historical answer, you know, and then it became a
popular term, great, and people like it and whatever.
But the other reason is because I think we
live in an extremely market-based society right now, right?
Everything is determined by various markets, and it's a,
it's also a metaphor that people understand. Um, AND
because, because we live in such a, it's a
markety world, and so it became a very good
proxy for talking about, um, everything else, including talking
and, and saying, well, well, maybe what a discussion
is, is it's, it's, you know, everyone brings out
their best wares, and you buy the, like, you
know, shiniest apples or the freshest looking loaves of
bread or whatever, but the problem with this before
is that an idea is not a commodity. You
know, it's not, and, and in fact, one of
the things I say in the book is that
uh it's not that we have ideas, we're not
like holding a bunch of ideas in a basket,
and we're like, these are my ideas. It's that
ideas have us, they shape us, and they determine
how we are and how we act, and they
really like are formative to us, and not only
that, but they're formative to the way we behave,
and the way we behave reshapes us. So they
have a much stronger and weirder grasp on us
than any kind of commodity we could hold in
our hands. And um. And we cannot easily exchange
them. And then I kind of spend a lot
of time pointing out that we can't exchange them
literally in the sense that I can't get you
to take my idea even if I want to.
But also we can't necessarily exchange our own. We're
not that good at changing our own minds even
when we want to become open minded. We are
just not holding on to them like commodities. It's
a very bad metaphor, but it's a very Powerful
metaphor because we live in such a market-based society,
and it kind of legitimizes a lot of people
that that find it interesting. They'll say, well, you
know, like people are believing what I'm saying right
now, so that must mean my ideas are the
best ones, you know.
Yeah, I mean, it seems like a very capitalist
idea as well, right, because it's the same as
people as liberals or neoliberals or capitalists in general
apply also to the market more broadly. I mean,
the idea that, oh, if we just let, if
we just allow for a free market to operate,
then the best products will rise to the top,
will be the Ones bought by people will be
the ones available for people to buy and so
on and so forth, but actually that's not necessarily
what happens, right, right,
yeah, yeah, it's the market as justice, and they're
like, oh well, there'll also be the market for
ideas, and that will be a just market, but
it's a, it's an incredibly unjust market at every
level, you know. I mean, a couple of billionaires
own most of our news platforms, but it's not
just that, it's just that humans don't relate to
this idea really in this way. They want to
relate ideas in general in this way.
Mhm. So, so, uh, I mean, how do people
actually change political ideas? On what basis does that
occur?
Yeah, so the two, again, the two things I
look at in my book that there's pretty good
evidence for empirically, and I'm, I'm a somewhat empirical
thinker, not totally. I have lots of theories too,
but I, I tend to write about things where
I think there's a very high degree of evidence,
um, because that matters to me, and, um. The
two things I look at are the way our
relationships change our politics over the course of our
life and the way our own actions change our
politics over the course of our life. So if
you look at people's relationships, there's pretty good evidence
that our friends changed our, our beliefs over the
course of our life, not just by like magnetically
pulling you towards their beliefs. In fact, um, one
of my favorite studies, they look at people that
are, you know, they can do this a lot
on university campuses because they have access to all
the students and students get randomly assigned to roommates
in universities. So they look at what happens if
two students are assigned to live together for a
year, that are strangers beforehand, and you know, they
don't necessarily move more than a little bit closer
to each other in political views, but if one
of them is really interested in politics and the
other one isn't, by the end of the year,
they're both very interested in politics. Um, BUT to,
you know, to broaden out from there, it seems
like what a lot of our relationships do is
it's not that they brainwash us, it's just that
they open the door to our involvement. Right, in
the thing, whatever it is. And so the other
thing that we see very big shifts in people's
beliefs about are things that essentially involve forms of
prejudice. So you, you see that basically, for example,
if people are homophobic, but then their friends come
out to them, they become much less homophobic if
they in, in, in a very specific set of
conditions, which we can get into if you want,
but in the right conditions when we are exposed
to people of other races, religions, ethnicities, etc. WE
become less prejudiced against those groups. Essentially our relationships
are like the the door being opened for us
to explore another belief that we otherwise wouldn't, and
we might not go through the door, but often
if the if the idea is a better interpretation
of the reality that we're now experiencing, we will,
especially if there are relationships involved, because relationships are
huge motivators for human beings, um. And yeah, and
so you can see that over the course of
people's lives, they tend to firstly um overcome prejudices
when they're placed in conditions of equality with people
different than themselves. I think that's very important and
central to what I write about because I don't,
I don't believe personally in a world where at
the end of the day we're all going to
agree, you know, even when people talk about polarization,
like there are negative aspects of polarization. Firstly, we're
mostly not experiencing ideological polarization where people are becoming
more extreme in their views. We're mostly just experiencing
effective polarization where people are just more angry, and
I think that's fine. I think it's fine for
people to disagree for the most part with, you
know, with the exception of some very racist and
horrible ideas like most ideas, OK, they exist on
the spectrum, and the job is not to erase
difference here. But, um, but I do think that
overcoming prejudice is like a fundamental thing within democracies
and important for like the continuation of life on
Earth. Um, AND then the other thing is our
own beliefs tend to shift our, our political, sorry,
our own actions tend to shift our political beliefs
over time. So, um, and the way I look
at this a lot is in terms of what,
what I call gateway actions. So there used to
be a debate in sociology among political sociologists about,
uh, you know, if people do small political actions,
does this make them feel good about themselves and
then they stop, or do they become more and
more involved in that issue? Um, LIKE, like, if
the levels, do they get really into environmentalism, or
do they say I've done my bit, like please
don't make me go on the climate march, you
know. And obviously for any individual it could go
either way, but on the whole, the research of
this point just the gateways, these small actions or
gateways again, kind of like the door opening, but
with action, right? And then you, you become more
and more likely to do more in that area.
Probably because when you look at the psychology of
it, once we start taking action on something even
in a small way, our brain kind of interprets
belief system in line with our own actions. So
it says, oh, I did that thing, I must
really care about the thing. In fact, I care
about it a lot. Let me think about it
more. What else should I do? And it kind
of cycles this way. And our actions tend to
shape our beliefs almost more than the other way
around, more than the other way around in a
lot of ways. So these are the two things
that are fundamental in a lot of ways.
But when you say that actions shape our beliefs
and in this particular case our political beliefs, what
kind of actions
exactly? Almost any actions. I've got a bunch of
different examples in the book, but, you know, one
of them is, is, is getting an abortion changes
people's views on abortion, and interestingly, not always uh
in the ways you would expect, or rather when
you get denied an abortion, you, you sometimes become
less in favor of abortion rights in the long
run. So they're not necessarily actions that were freely
chosen. In fact, our, our imposed actions could change
our mind too, which is scary and interesting, helps
a lot about cults and authoritarianism and, you know,
all that stuff. Um, PEOPLE experiencing extreme climate events
seem to believe more in climate change, which makes
sense, um, but yeah, any kind of really any
kind of action can potentially have quite an effect
on people's political views. Um, THE more they seem
to attribute their own army to it that that
seems to matter, so they think they, they chose
the action, but interestingly it can work either way,
and people are very fond, it turns out of
it's sort of deciding to do it all along
or they always thought this all along. It's a
big part of how the brain defends itself from
feeling controlled. So, yeah, I mean, I've just given
you some examples, but a very, very wide range
of our own actions and experiences are gonna shift
politics over the course of our life.
And, and those the more, let's say material conditions
we live in, like for example, if we live
in uh in a society which is economically and
politically unstable or if, if we live in, uh,
or if we have low socioeconomic status and so
on, do those kinds of things influence how our
ideas change over time?
Yeah, I mean, absolutely. But interestingly, again, it's not
necessarily in a way that we might consider rational,
right? So, um, one of the things that, you
know, I think it's important to say it's not
that like people, because I think we're living through
a period of time where because there's so much,
and I don't necessarily mean that this is bad,
I just think it's worth noting like there's, at
least until recently, so much emphasis on diversity and
equity and inclusion and this kind of thing. There
can then be the kind of cheap version of
understanding this populating the internet, which is like, oh,
you have a lived experience, and then you know
truly how oppression works, right? But this is not
sadly, how it always works. There are people that
go through very oppressive experiences, but they interpret them
in inaccurate ways, um, and that's not say everyone
does, but it's important to understand this aspect of
human behavior empirically, and one of the things I
look at in the book is something called systems
justification theory. Which is um from this guy John
T. Jost who works at NYU. He's a really
great guy writes really interesting books, but in any
case, one of the things he notices is that
there are big segments of the population in the
United States who are certainly oppressed in various ways.
For example, he looks at very low income black
people in the southern United States, so they're experiencing
a kind of compounded, uh, like racism and poverty
and, um, kind of like worse, worse racism even
then, you know, in the north, etc. AND, um.
But interestingly, they tend to be less convinced of
the systemic issue. They tend to say like, no,
you know, there's less racism basically than other groups,
uh, comparatively anyway, and what's happening there, he suggests
is that people, um, they, they kind of need
to find a way to Justify the system since
they have to live under it. I could explain
to you the psychological mechanics in great depth, but,
but essentially what's happening is there's a contradiction between,
uh, you know, your, your sense of agency and
the reality of your life, and you, your sense
of agency, real or false, winds, and it's easier
for a person to tell themselves, interestingly, like, the
system must be fair, but I just haven't quite
worked hard enough yet, than it is for them
to feel trapped. Um, AND, and so we can
find ways essentially to rationalize the experiences we've had
in ways that are inaccurate, that there is, of
course, actually just a lot of systemic racism and
poverty. But it happens to work better for a
lot of human subjects to tell themselves, um, oh,
like, you know, OK, maybe I got fired from
my job, but if I just work hard enough,
I'm not going to become an entrepreneur, so like
capitalism still works, you know, it's much easier, and
like you can see this like at other levels,
like there's a lot of, I don't know, psychoanalytic
literature, psychotherapeutic literature, but children love to like continuously
believe that their parents um are just one step
away from really finally understanding them because that's that
gives them a sense of agency. Compared to knowing
that maybe mommy and daddy will never get it,
you know, so people love to like kind of
believe the system could work. That gives them the
sense that something might happen, and as a result,
we justify systems that we shouldn't. We say, OK,
the system is basically working even when it's not.
So I guess what I'm saying here is these
actions change our actions and experiences change our politics,
but not necessarily in ways that are a good
interpretation of how those systems work.
Right, but could it be the case that at
least to some extent those rationalizations would be available
from the current like political, economic, and cultural environment
we live in. Like, for example, we live in.
In neoliberal capitalist societies because that kind of narrative
of oh it's of personal responsibility and things like
that is something that we hear a lot from
capitalists,
right? Yeah, well, look, I mean, I think ideology
is always a set of like The rationalizations, right,
and some, maybe some ideologies have better rationalizations than
others. Um, I think, I think a lot of
capitalist ideology is a series of rationalizations of to
help individuals navigate. Help is a strong word here,
but you know, it's to enable them to continue
to do what they need to do within the
system. And it's, for example, a really compelling narrative
that like you are an entrepreneur and you're gonna
make it big one day. If you look at,
I'm always fascinated by like studies of people who
work gig economy jobs and and like, of course
it's a minority of them certainly, but like a
big minority, like 30% often will say like, I
don't want any other kind of job. This is
what I want because I believe that I'm gonna
make it big, even though they're maybe like, you
know, delivering for Deliveroo. And but, but, but ideology
works really well that way because think about it,
every day you get up and you do a
bunch of rounds, and if you sneak in two
more deliveries than you did yesterday, you feel good
about yourself and you're like, I'm, I'm like growing
my business, you know, how good does that feel?
So, so the point is that a lot of
our political beliefs, to get back to the main
point of the book in a way are shaped
by these daily actions. You take the daily action,
then you rationalize it to yourself, and then it
feels good, and then, right, and you could do
this for like loads of things. You can do
this for, you know, becoming a tradwife. You can
do this for all kinds of stuff that's actually
really destructive. But it feels good in the short
run in terms of feeling agency and a sense
of self.
And what do you think explains political polarization, because
that's something that people talk a lot about and
worry about nowadays. Apparently, I'm not sure to what
extent that is actually true, but apparently many of
our societies nowadays are very fractured politically. What kinds
of aspects of our social lives do you think
explain that?
I mean, look, I, I would say there's, there's
a lot, but this is the basic thing. In
general, most of the research you look at does
not suggest that people are more, more extreme in
their views, right? And honestly this shouldn't surprise anyone
who, I don't know if you ever got into
like a little World War II rabbit hole, right,
reading about like I sometimes read like biographies of
people in the United Kingdom during World War II,
but if you look at the, the family structure,
like the aristocratic family structure, they'll have like one
communist or like 3 fascists, and then like in
the middle one kind of centrist person, and actually
a lot of families looking at today, right. So
I, I, I, I think the idea that we're,
that we're ideologically more polarized is, is not that
empirically well borne out, it's not even that like
relevant to, you know, the briefest of glances. However,
what we do seem to see is that people
are more upset with the other side, they're less
tolerating of them, they don't want to be friends
with them, they certainly would be upset if their
children married them, etc. ETC. And I think there's,
there's a couple of different explanations, and one of
the things I, one of the words I really
like using a lot is it's overdetermined, which just
basically means there's so many factors, um, pushing things
in that direction that even if you removed one
or the other, the factors it would still be
true, right? Cause it's, but in any case, You
know, part of it is that, um, Uh, I
would say like the crises that we're currently facing
make it at least more obvious to people that
they truly have. Mm. Truly do not want the
same outcomes in some respects, right? If you, if
you are, for example, on, on the left and
you see What billionaires are doing to both the
planet and the economy, you will, you will just
see them as fundamentally opposed to your interests. There's
not like a really a good way of kind
of mediating that divide. And similarly, I would say
there are a lot of people on the right
culturally where they look at what the left wants
to do to. You know, social reproduction and politics
and culture, let's say they just say like this
is not, I cannot accept that world that you
want us all to live in, and maybe there's
some misrecognition there, but on the whole, there are
different interests. People have different interests, and maybe they're
becoming more obvious. The other thing though is I
would say one of the things I talk about
a lot in the book, and then my next
book is about is something called social atrophy. Which
is, um, the, the weakening of our sort of
like mental muscles, and I, and I mean this
in a very literal and scientific sense. There's a
lot of good um medical evidence for this, that
people who are more socially isolated, there's the weakening
of their, their neural system for social interaction. So
you don't, you don't interact with people socially as
many hours of the day, you get worse at
it. And eventually you are worse at reading social
cues, you're more exhausted by social interactions. If you
remember coming out of lockdowns and like feeling a
bit weird, having conversations for longer than 10 minutes,
you kind of know, right? And that makes sense
because our social interactions are deeply taxing. They're one
of the hardest things our brain ever has to
do, and um when you don't use a part
of the brain, you lose it pretty rapidly. This
is why I can't speak any foreign languages cause
I'm a terrible American, but You know, the many
other things you could lose as well without practicing.
And so, if you look at the amount of
hours people are spending with other human beings in
the West, we're spending fewer and fewer hours with
other people, and like, especially over the last 15
years, you know, a lot of the, I mean,
it's been happening for about 70 to 50 years
in most countries that you can measure this, but
the 15 last 15 years, especially, people are spending
more and more hours alone. And so they're probably
using their neural networks less for social interaction, they're
getting worse at social interaction, etc. And one of
the things that tends to happen when that occurs
is that people become more paranoid. Just in general,
they become less good at interpreting social cues and
they ruminate more, they worry more, and the result
of those two things is that you start being
much more suspicious of other people and their motivations
and their intentions, um, even at a low-key level,
like you might think, oh, my friend didn't text
me back, they must not like me or care
about me anymore, you know, etc. That's, that's the
level of paranoia of a person suffering from schizophrenia,
for example, but it's, it's, it's an inaccurate perception
of reality that is actually likely to harm your
social choices in the long run. And when I
look at similarly the like slow worsening of social
trust, for example, I really see the mark. In
parts of this neurological phenomenon. Um, AND I would
say if you look at polarization, you can see
a similar thing where you, you can say, OK,
well, it's very possible that it's like the logical
outcome of a world where people don't have shared
goals anymore and can see that clearly, and they
also distrust people more, is probably a world where
we are effectively polarized where we hate the other
side more, and I don't think that's good, and
I don't think it's fixable without reintegrating the social
fabric, which is like a big material project really.
But what do you think are the factors behind
uh the fact that people, as you said, over
particularly these past 15 years have spent more and
more time alone? I mean, what factors have contributed
to that?
I mean, I know this is an annoying answer,
but it is overdetermined, um, and there are a
lot of factors, and I'm actually still working on
this for my next book because my next book
is all about social atrophy. But um, no, no,
no, but it's a good question. I mean, look,
there, there's a bunch. So in the book I
just wrote, and don't talk about politics, one of
the things I look at is the the very
noticeable decline in third spaces, so places that are
neither the workplace nor the home where people can
go for either no money at all or relatively
cheap. So we're talking about places like the pub,
the church, the park, the gym, you know. Um,
AND except for the last one, which is kind
of growing, but most of the other ones are
shrinking. They're shrinking because they're becoming more expensive or
literally just less available. Also, people's housing situations are,
are changing. So, um, it used to be that
people would move into city centers. They're now increasingly
moving out of city centers because of affordability problems,
and so people are just further away from everything.
So there's fewer third spaces they could go to.
Third spaces are closing in the United Kingdom. I
think we're, we used to be losing like 1
pub a day, and now we're losing 2 pubs
a day, so it's worrying. I don't even drink
really, but like, you know, you need these spaces,
they do a fundamental thing for humans. We're living
in a delivery culture, so if you're getting a
coffee, you're not going to the local coffee shop
and sitting there as much as you're like maybe
getting a coffee delivered, you know, or like you're,
you don't go out for anyway, I could go
on and on, but we're living in a world
where basically people are inhabiting the same space as
others physically less, which is bad because it's probably
true in most respects that the online spaces cannot
compete in terms of how they help people integrate
socially, um. And even politically in some cases, so
we're losing social infrastructure, and that's a big part
of it, and I really care about that. But
I would say though is that in my next
book I'm also beginning to, I mean, I want
to walk through this research very carefully because it's
politically tricky and uh can sound reactionary even though
I'm a massive feminist and like weird radical polyamorous
person, but um. Another reason that we are probably
more alone is that we are more single. Um,
THAT people are increasingly not in long term serious
relationships where they live together or like they're not
married basically, um, whether or not that's legal, and
that marriage seems to have had like a, I
mean, it does a lot of things, right? It's
a big institution in our society, it, it kind
of keeps men doing stuff, um, you know, it
keeps everyone having some companionship. Um, AND I, and
I think, you know, there, there's some, some reasonable
evidence that a lot of the increasing number of
hours spent alone is just that people are more
single, and then the reasons people are single are
very economic and complicated and like partially about feminism,
and, you know, look, I'm not intrinsically ideologically pro
marriage or even relationships. Well, no human relationships, but
not necessarily romantic relationships, but essentially we're we're seeing
the downfall of like this one major institution slowly,
or at least maybe it will become like a
more niche thing. And we need other institutions that
hold people together, right? That that's, that would be
my much more considered and um I would say
like combination liberal radical view, which is like, maybe
it doesn't need to be marriage, complicated, but it
needs to be something. We need, we need. Social
institutions that help people gently reintegrate into the social
world all the time. I mean, I think about
this a lot as a, you know, a very
radical Jewish person, but, but I still go to
synagogue. I go to like a little, you know,
non-Zionist synagogue in London, and one of the things
you realize very quickly is that that that does
something for you, right? There are these people, they
know you, it's a very small synagogue, obviously, and
like everyone knows you, and if you don't go
for a while, people worry about you, and then
they check in on you. If you go, then
you, it's your job and you look out for
people, and then you take care of each other
and someone dies, and there's a whole mourning ritual
or whatever, OK, um. If you don't have that
institution, you have none of that stuff anymore, you
know, and we also have seen obviously the decline
of religion, people move a lot between geographically, um,
at least they did in the last generation, we're
probably seeing the effects of that in the current
generation. So anyway, there's like there's a lot of
different things happening, um, and almost all of them,
I would say have to do with our material
conditions. Some of them have to do with gender
roles, um, a lot of it is neoliberalism, of
course, or the effects of neoliberalism down the road,
um. But I guess one of the reasons I'm
interested in looking at things at this level is
that I think. This is still the level at
which individuals together in relatively small groups can take
meaningful action, you know, the, the, the, the crisis
of like social atrophy and social isolation is a
crisis that we can begin to solve in ways
that we can notice, and I think if you
tell people like, OK, we've got like a methane
emissions crisis, I'm not saying we shouldn't work on
that, we should, but it's very hard for people
to imagine. What that would take, whereas in my
book I, I feel like you could do something
tomorrow about your neighborhood's level of social atrophy, you
know, and you can do it even if you
don't have, I mean, money helps certainly physical space
especially helps, but you don't need the money, and
in some cases, interestingly, you can create like the
opposite effect where the less money people have, the
more likely they are to band together to do
things together, and then they form connections, so. I
find it's a really useful way of thinking through
this problem of isolation itself, but also it's other
political variables that it touches.
Uh, SO which kinds of solutions to how we
interact with other people do you suggest for, for
us to be able to reason better about politics?
Yeah, so I mean I wrote like a post
in my sub stack which people can go read
which says like what to do instead of talking
about politics, right, you know, um. And it's got,
it's got it all laid out. So in one,
in one sense we can almost just like point
people there, but, but more realistically, you know, to
give a very broad overview, I think one of
the first things I say is it's and I
find it takes people a minute to take this
in, and that's because we have the individualistic culture.
That people want like and understandably my brain works
this way too, because that's just how it works,
but people want like an individual answer that they're
going to go and I, I individually I'm going
to go do this. I thought we were like
vitamin C deficiency, OK, but we're not, you know,
what you're gonna go do is join the group
of people also doing the same thing in some
way, right? You know, maybe, maybe that's will look
very different for different people, like if you're a
parent, maybe you're going to start with groups of
other parents, maybe whatever, but OK yeah, so versus
join a group, and maybe the group is, is
less radical and more citizenship based. It's really radical
and you're gonna like overthrow the government and blow
burn coal plants. I don't know, but either way,
you want to join a group of other people
committed to doing something. And we're gonna come up
with a strategy together, because the kind of political
and social problems I write about are not ones
that we solve on our own. Um, AND then
I give some examples in the book of particularly
useful infrastructures that I think are good models. So
that is the food cooperative system I'm part of.
So the way that that one works is that
you are organizing around a material need people have,
which is food, and food is very expensive, can
be very expensive, and the way the food cooperative
system works is that you recruit 13 of your
neighbors or something, and then you each week go
and you buy collectively from a wholesaler. Some kind,
and then you split it up, right? And then
you can make your grocery bill way lower. Um,
WE get a lot of what we need for
about 5 pounds a week, you know, and that's
like really cheap for groceries. Of course, it's not
really about the food, although that's good. It's about
then you know all your neighbors, and then you
have a site for organizing with your neighbors, and
you've made all these social connections. It's a gateway
action, and then maybe you'll want to do a
financial cooperative, and then maybe you'll start to create
a loan system for each other to get out
of, you know, this or that financial problem, and
then maybe you'll want to prevent each other being
evicted, and so. This is a good example because
people can imagine doing this, and it is genuinely
doable. I mean, you could do it even without
the particular system I'm part of, you could do
this on your own. On your own, as in
without the existing infrastructure, but with other people, so
that's a good example. I think the other thing
though that increasingly I almost wish I had put
more of in the book, but it's, it's really
come out more of the reception of the book
is the other thing people have to do is
build a different set of skills and impulses and
like, uh, mindset is a good word for this
as well, and I, I feel weird writing about
this because it sounds like I'm a self-help guru
or something, and I'm Really not, but I guess
something I've noticed when I have begun to present
this book to the public is that a lot
of people are very interested in it, and they
might be intellectually persuaded by it, and, and they
care about it deeply, and then they hear about
some of the things I'm suggesting, and it sounds
really difficult and scary to them. And the reason
that it sounds difficult and scary is not that
it's intellectually difficult or scary, or at least they're
very bright people, and they can certainly manage it,
right? But it's um It's that it requires them
to to employ a completely different set of skills
than we are taught to use in school. And
that, you know, I don't know about you, but
like most of my formal education was teaching me
to write essays and argue with people and debate
them and like exchange in the marketplace of ideas
and That was absolutely useless after a certain point,
and it's really not very useful for activism because
activism and organizing and protecting your community and, you
know, however you want to frame these different things
is not about that. And the skills that you
need to do work like that, to do real
political work is building relationships, talking to strangers, figuring
out what other people need, getting them involved, giving
them something that makes them feel like they have
a sense of agency. I mean, it's all this
like complicated interpersonal work. And it's tiring because social
life is tiring, but it's meaningful because social life
is meaningful, and we're not taught to do almost
any of that in school, and people's social skills
are pretty weak a lot of the time, you
know, and there's a lot of social skills that
we have to build. I mean social in the
broad sense of social here. It's not that you
should just like have nice chit chats, it's that
you're asking someone like, hey, I know this is
scary, but I think that all of us should
go on strike, you know. Um, AND so, yeah,
the other thing I would say is you want
to not just join a community, uh, like a
community or a struggle or whatever, and work on
the problems with other people, although that's very important.
You infrastructure like the food co op that gives
you gateway actions and helps other people have gateway
actions. It's all great, but along the way you're
gonna have to build a different set of skills
and impulses, and they are gonna feel weird and
different and uncomfortable at first, and that work never
ends. You just keep doing it.
Yeah, so look, I would like to hear your
thoughts on social media specifically. I mean, on the
show over the years I've talked with psychologists, sociologists,
experts on communication and social media specifically, and I,
and I mean, I, I think that the main
message is Got from them is that people have
actually been demonizing over demonizing social media in many
aspects. For example, when people claim that social media
has contributed to political polarization, I mean, it doesn't
seem to be lots of very good evidence to
support that idea, and then Uh, I mean, some
claims that people make about how social media might
affect people's social skills or even, uh, children and
adolescents, more specifically, that it seems that, I, I
mean, of course, some of the evidence is not
straight. Forward or it's not pointing necessarily toward one
answer or the other in terms of the negative
or positive effects that social media might have, but
in the context of your book and the topics
you explore there, how do you look at the
role of social media in people's lives?
Yeah, this is a good question. So here, here's
what I would say, right? I mean, I would,
um, I actually worked as a content strategist a
lot in my, in my like career, my career
outside of academia, and so I think about what
it does in a completely almost, you know, I
have spent a lot of time thinking about it
in a kind of like strategic way, just like
how can we get a thing to go viral
on social media, and I have an Instagram that
has, you know, 38,000 followers because a year ago
I need that and I built it from scratch,
um. And so I think a lot about how
this works, and, and I want to say like
there's a little bit of truth in what you've
just said and that it's not just like social
media bad and people consume the social media and
then brain stupid, like, no, this is a really
stupid way of thinking about this. Um, I see
social media as, first of all, television of our
era, and I mean that in the literal sense,
if you look at, this is the last year,
225 is the year people watched more short form
video than they did normal television. So, you know,
really it's like the main media dissemination for whole
groups of people, especially people in the global south
and young people, and that that just matters, right?
Even if you're not necessarily being hardcore persuaded from
a political topic online, you are being influenced in
various ways. Um, AND I will get more, get
into that more in a minute. So that's very
important. And then the other thing is, it's a
place where things circulate, so they, you know, if
you create a successful part of social media, then
the idea gets passed around and around and around
and around and around and around, and you can
make a lot of money, and you can reach
a lot of people, and it's the game is
circulation. And for that reason, it's a powerful infrastructure,
but it's a powerful infrastructure because it slowly leads
people towards actions and relationships, not because they just
consume the message passively, right? So for example, let's
say that you're already like a disaffected person, and
then you go online and you stumble into a
community of other people who are also disaffected in
the same way. What's gonna happen is you're going
to slowly build relationships with them, possibly by sharing
memes with them, but also every time you repost
the memes or whatever. You, that's an action of
yours that you've taken, you begin to think, I
must really believe this. I made a meme about
it. And I think, you know, you can really
understand a lot of like kind of far right
stuff by understanding it's not so much that the
moment where they like see a piece of right-wing
propaganda and then they become like violently radicalized. No,
it's it's very slow process, but first they post
it kind of as a joke, but then they
kind of also Like, begin to leave it a
little bit because they they posted it, and then
they meet more people, and then those people become
their social net. At the end of the book,
I, I put a quote from an interview with
Steve Bannon, the, uh, you know, strategist for Trump,
Donald Trump, a very right wing guy, obviously, I
mean, beyond, and he has a strategy very much
in line with this. He understands a lot of
what I write about in the book, but obviously
he's doing terrible things with it. But um, No,
he says you use social media kind of to
catch people like fish, she doesn't say fish, but,
you know, he, he, he says they, they, I
find them online, I get them to do lots
of little actions, uh, then I asked them to
take a step offline and do something in the
local Republican Party, and they feel great, and they
feel great, he says, because they have friends, they
didn't have friends before, and now they're in these
like clubs that I've set up for them, and
they feel good cause they have friends and they're
doing something. And that's fundamentally what makes human beings
happy. I mean, it's why also if you look
at the left, um, people who have the same
left wing views can vary, statistically, they vary enormously
in their happiness level, just based on whether they're
actually doing any real activism. Left wing activists are
actually relatively happy, despite all of the many frustrations
we might have with each other. We're doing much
better than our equivalently believing, but not acting peers.
Um, IN any case, what I mean is I
see social media as the sort of like media
part of that function. Right, so it's like mediatizes
people's social relationships, of course, that's fascinating. It, it
like is a gateway mechanism for that gateway action.
Um, IT'S probably not radicalizing them directly, though, and
I think this is a difficult thing for people
to understand off the bat, but it's, it's still
true.
Yeah, so let me ask you one last question
then. We at the, at the very beginning of
our conversation started by talking about debate and discussion
in the political realm and the market, the idea
of the marketplace of ideas. Do you think That
we, it would be possible for us to replace
these liberal ideal of the marketplace of ideas with
some other ideal that is more grounded on the
kinds of suggestions you put forth in your book.
Yeah, I mean, I don't, I don't have like
off the top of my head another like great
metaphor for you, and I think this is also
the danger of metaphors, right? They, they are beautiful,
but they also like they simplify it, right? And
the reality of how human beings form their political
views is so um. It's not it's complicated because
I think complicated is a is a is a
plastic word. It kind of like can mean anything
you want it to mean in a way that
isn't helpful, but um. I think it is Difficult
to find a good metaphor right now because Of
the way that we are stuck. Uh, IN the,
in the skill set, uh, kind of what I
was describing earlier, stuck in the skill set, right,
where people don't have the skills for the kind
of work I'm describing, and so, Actually knocking on
20 of your neighbors' doors and asking them if
they want cheap groceries, it's not that hard. It's
just not, but it is for people now. Um,
SIMILARLY, I think it's just very difficult for us
to find a good metaphor for the way people
actually politically reason because we're doing less of it
than we used to, and we can't recognize it
when it's happening. Um. So I don't have an
easy one, an easy answer in the sense I
can't tell you, yeah, we should just think about
it like this, but I mean this is not,
again, like it's not really a I think there's
a little bit about my book that I carefully
packaged it to look a little bit like, you
know, a Steven Pinker book or a Jonathan Haid
book, right? It's really like I, I know that
genre very well. I think about some of the
same mechanics in a way of thinking about studies
and empiricism, OK, but, um, but it's not one
of those books because it's not meant to give
you, frankly, as easy answers as they give you.
Um, IT doesn't have as neat of a story
to tell, and that's a good thing because the
reality is messier than they are allowing it to
be. And it's not as self-helpy because I don't
believe in self-help as something you do alone. I
think it's something you always do with other people,
the big important like self-help, you know, um, so
I don't have a good metaphor for you, but
I'm, what I am hoping is that I think
over time once people begin to For example, like,
engage in a social world when they want to
engage in political reasoning, and they discover the benefits
of that and the difficulties of that, often the
marketplace idea falls apart. I don't know, you know,
if you've ever been a part of a Have
you've ever been part of the PTA, let's say,
the parent-teacher association, like, I think this is like
a great like example building block for political life.
Like there's politics in there, there's the politics of
like what what should the kids learn about sex,
but also like how much recess should the kids
have and like why aren't the teachers paid enough.
There's loads of politics built into that stuff, but
it's not a marketplace of ideas. It's a, it's
a much more like complicated thing about like building
relationships of trust and like trying to find, you
know, complicated shared ground, but then sometimes you have
to stand up for what you really believe in
and OK. Um, SO all I can say is
I think that the number one antidote to the
bad metaphor is the real experience, you know. Um,
AND maybe the real experience with a little bit
of theoretical help and a lot of discussion with
other people, and I'm hoping we replace it that
way.
OK, great. So the book is again, Don't talk
about Politics, how to change 21st century Minds, and
I will be leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. Uh, AND you mentioned
your sub stack. Where else can people find you
on the
internet? I'm painfully on on like LinkedIn and I'm,
I'm painfully on Instagram, but I'm actually, yeah, I'm
on both those places, so yeah, come, come find
me and Blue Sky as well. I try not
to use Twitter because it seems bad. I mean,
it's always bad. I have a chapter in the
book on why it's bad, so I'm only fake
on Twitter, but I'm real on those other platforms
and people can come say hi.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
really great to talk with you. Thank you so
much for having me. Hi guys, thank you for
watching this interview until the end. If you liked
it, please share it, leave a like and hit
the subscription button. The show is brought to you
by Enlights Learning and Development done differently. Check their
website at enlights.com and also please consider supporting the
show on Patreon or PayPal. I would also like
to give a huge thank you to my main
patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick
Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird,
Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip
Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegeru Inai Zu Mark
Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis
Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith,
John Yardston, and Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John
Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo
Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte
Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary
G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco
Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim
Duffy, Sony Smith, John Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson,
Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists,
Larry D. Lee Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey,
then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul,
Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per
Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR,
Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht.
A special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim
Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict
Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo
Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.